Add draft NU6.3 deployment and Version 6 Transaction Format ZIPs (#1301)
zcash/zips: zips/zip-0258.md

# Abstract

This proposal defines the deployment of the NU6.3 network upgrade, which introduces the
Ironwood shielded pool. The consensus changes for NU6.3 are specified across the version 6
transaction format [^draft-zodl-valargroup-ironwood-txformat], the Orchard Action circuit
update [^draft-zodl-valargroup-action-circuit-update], ZIP 2005 [^zip-2005], and this ZIP,
which fixes the activation parameters and the consensus rules that gate on NU6.3 activation
regardless of transaction version.

# Specification

## NU6.3 deployment

The primary sources of information about NU6.3 consensus protocol changes are:

* The Zcash Protocol Specification [^protocol].
* ZIP 200: Network Upgrade Mechanism [^zip-0200].
* The version 6 transaction format [^draft-zodl-valargroup-ironwood-txformat], the Orchard
  Action circuit update [^draft-zodl-valargroup-action-circuit-update], and ZIP 2005
  [^zip-2005].

The network handshake and peer management mechanisms defined in ZIP 201 [^zip-0201] also
apply to this upgrade.

The following network upgrade constants [^zip-0200] are defined for the NU6.3 upgrade:

CONSENSUS_BRANCH_ID
: TBD

ACTIVATION_HEIGHT (NU6.3)

> : Testnet: TBD

Reviewer: 4096000

@nuttycom says:

```
ghci> activationDate 4096000 4088173
2026-06-30 16:41:01.781410625 UTC
```

: Mainnet: TBD

MIN_NETWORK_PROTOCOL_VERSION (NU6.3)
: Testnet: TBD
: Mainnet: TBD

The version group ID for version 6 transactions [^draft-zodl-valargroup-ironwood-txformat] is:

TX_VERSION_GROUP_ID (v6)
: TBD

For each network (Testnet and Mainnet), nodes compatible with NU6.3 activation on that
network MUST advertise a network protocol version that is greater than or equal to the
MIN_NETWORK_PROTOCOL_VERSION (NU6.3) for that activation.

## Consensus rules from NU6.3 activation

The following consensus rules apply to every transaction in a block mined at a height greater
than or equal to the NU6.3 ACTIVATION_HEIGHT, regardless of its transaction version. They
ensure that, after NU6.3, the *Orchard pool* can only be spent from (not added to), and that
cross-address transfers within the *Orchard pool* are disabled, so that newly created shielded
value is directed into the *Ironwood pool*.

* A coinbase transaction MUST NOT contain any *Orchard-pool* Actions; that is, its Orchard
  component MUST be empty.

* Every *Orchard-pool* Action MUST be created with cross-address transfers disabled (the

>   `enableCrossAddress` bit clear). This restriction is enforced by the Action circuit

Reviewer 2: ```suggestion
  `enableCrossAddress` bit set as 0). This restriction is enforced by the Action circuit
```

  verifying key, which is selected by block height
  [^draft-zodl-valargroup-action-circuit-update], so it applies to *Orchard-pool* Actions in
  version 5 transactions as well as version 6.

* No new value may enter the *Orchard pool*: for every transaction,
  $\mathsf{v}^{\textit{OrchardPoolBalance}} \geq 0$ (so the encoded `valueBalanceOrchard` is
  nonnegative). Value may still leave the *Orchard pool*, including across the turnstile into the
  *Ironwood pool*.

## Changes to ZIP 209

ZIP 209 [^zip-0209] is extended to track an Ironwood chain value pool balance and to require

> it, like the other shielded pool balances, not to become negative.

Reviewer 2: Likely duplicated with the tx format ZIP
